the most important factor to getting
better braking is to remember that your
front brake is by far and away the most
effective way to slow down some people
actually advocate using only the front
brake for effectiveness and the theory
is sound you get the most effective
braking just at the point at which your
back wheel starts to rise off the ground
when it can offer no braking force of
its own now that's all well and good but
there's no reason not to use your back
brake either for those moments when it's
touching the ground it will help you
slow down particularly when you first
apply your brakes and you're gauging
just how hard you can pull them on you
should almost always apply both brakes
together although not necessarily with
the same force the back brake requires
much less in order to use your front
brakes safely you need to adjust your
weight distribution on the bike to
counter the forces of deceleration the
harder you brake the more important it
is to get your body in the correct
position when riding at speed I tend to
ride on the drops and one of the main
reasons is the extra control we have in
this position when riding at higher
speeds and a lot of this is due to
braking not only hands really secure in
this position because your body weight
is lowered you're able to cope much
better with the increased braking forces
the main issue with braking hard is
going over the handlebars but by
straightening your arms and pushing your
back side behind the saddle you can
counter that force of deceleration for
gentle braking it's fine to hold on to
the hoods
your body is in its most upright
position here and you have the weakest
grip of the bars but for most situations
in normal riding this is going to be
absolutely fine and I spend most of my
writing time in this position one of the
most important tips to help with better
braking is to develop the instinct to
release the levers if you feel either
wheels start to skid often ask it can
happen so suddenly that you don't feel
like you have time to do anything about
it
but in most cases you do just as your
car has anti-lock brakes to improve
braking you can do the same on your bike
you don't have to release the brake
entirely just enough wheel regains
traction if it slips this action can
take a long time to master but it's
really fundamental to taking your riding
ability to the next level if you do any
mountain biking you have to get this
dial even more quickly and riding
off-road can be a really good way of
learning this skill in a slightly safer
environment generally with braking it's
really important to practice the correct
we become instinctive when you need to
break in an emergency you act on
instinct Wow so your conscious thought
catches up later it's what makes
breaking technique so important you can
really help to work specifically on it
so don't be afraid to practice these
skills and repeat them
you can also help to dramatically
improve your braking by making a couple
of inexpensive but incredibly important
changes to your bike if you're that way
inclined you can get away with fudging
quite a bit of bike maintenance but to
brake effectively you need to have
effective brakes how expensive they are
is not the issue we're talking about
function and that means cables and pads
sticky gritty cables are best ruin any
feel you get from the brake and at their
worst are just dangerous it's not just
power that you lose but also modulation
if you have to pull hard at the lever to
get any kind of response from the brake
you can't feel what the wheels are
telling you now it might cost you the
price of about five cups of coffee but
replacing your brake cables makes an
incredible difference second mechanical
advantage you can get minor actually
cost you anything
make sure your brake pads are well set
up so they strike the rim in the correct
place and at the correct time I'm not a
big believer in expensive brake pads
working better than stock ones just make
the most of the ones you have finally
where to brake is the last piece of the
puzzle in improving your braking now of
course most of time you won't feel that
you get to choose where to brake but
small adjustments can make a big
difference cornering is the biggest
example braking while cornering is
something that should really be avoided
as it increases the forces on the tires
and it's one of the biggest causes of
crashes too much braking in a corner can
send either the front or the back ends
out but usually the front so try to get
all your deceleration done in advance of
the corner generally if you need to keep
your speed in check through corners it
is okay to do so but just scrub your
brakes gently to moderate the speed
don't actually try and slow down it's
also worth being aware of the surface
underneath your tires loose or broken
roads can dramatically reduce your
braking ability so if you can look to
choose a smooth patch of road on which
to brake avoid drain covers white lines
and especially gravel which can collect
in the middle and at the edges of roads
for more how-tos click on Simon's
spotted helmet and if this kind of
childish humor appeals to you click on
Matt subscribe